our panel of guests now to take us
through all of this joining me on said
is tamama kamut assistant professor of
public policy at the Doha Institute for
Graduate Studies uh Muhammad stal a
Palestinian lawyer based and occupied
East Jerusalem is with us as well as AA
Elder a political analyst and
contributor to the haritz newspaper
thank you all very much for joining us
AKA if I can uh begin with you please I
mean you're in Tel Aviv can you just
explain how all of this is being viewed
there is it being ignored or dismissed
completely well I can tell you that uh
in my newspaper in her uh today you can
find it here on page four uh and here
you can see the report about the
cabinets meeting yesterday about the
American outline uh so you see it's uh
just minimized and uh the Israeli public
is is busy with uh two different issues
first of all the uh captives what is uh
the future of uh the uh negotiations
with Hamas and the other thing that uh
uh how long will it take until we bring
down the Netanyahu radical right
government um and uh the uh discussion
in the international court of justice
and uh what was just reported about the
situation in Gaza uh is if I may it's a
collateral damage of netanyahu's regime
and um the uh Israelis are more
concerned about uh the uh next steps
that President Biden may take or may not
take which means if he will decide that
he cannot AFF for to supply more weapons
and shells to Israel because he's got
his own political problems to uh be
concerned about uh in the upcoming
elections so
um I want to you touched on this a
little bit but I want to talk through a
little bit more of the responsibilities
that Netanyahu and the Israeli
government has because under
International humanitarian law Israel as
an occupying power does have certain
responsibilities the occupied territory
must be administered for the benefit of
the local population in this case
Palestinians but Israel enforces
discriminatory laws and policies
subjecting Palestinians even children to
military rather than civilian courts now
the laws state public order and safety
must be ensured however armed settler
attacks are at record levels as we've
been reporting and Israel must not
displace the local population or move
its own civilians into the territory but
an estimated 750,000 Israeli settlers
inhabit about 300 settlements in the
occupied West Bank as well as East
Jerusalem the occupying power Israel is
also forbidden from enforcing Collective
punishment on the local population but
Israel routinely destroys infrastructure
demolishes homes and digs up roads as we
have seen time and time again so a I
want to go back to you on this because
why do you think Israel has failed to
fulfill its responsibilities as an
occupying
Force the answer Tom is uh very short
because they can because uh the price
tag uh for doing it for uh 57 years was
close to zero um as long as you can have
it both ways you can occupy the
territories uh you can get the American
Support um the International Community
in the best case uh will publish uh some
soft statement against uh the the
occupation and violation of human rights
in the occupied territories and business
as usual so um if you are an Israeli
politician even not from the liud look
at what uh guns Benny guns the leader of
the so-called Center party said
yesterday yes that um um Palestinian
state is not on the table now yeah and
um and now Israel is playing the victim
and this is the Paradox that on one hand
Israel is uh the last uh colonial state
in the in the western Society on the
other hand if you ask the Israeli in the
street he will tell you that we are the
victims of Terror okay Muhammad I want
to bring you in now uh in regards to the
icj hearing that is going to begin in
the next hour or so what are the
potential legal consequences for Israel
here
and this is a big day this is a big day
because the Palestinians have been
waiting this for decades uh the
Palestinians have been trying to use
international law and to use
international diplomacy and to use the
mechanisms within the United Nations but
so far all these uh mechanisms did not
really help them in changing the reality
on the
ground uh today with the hearing and I J
and hopefully the advisory opinion that
will come at the end of those hearings
uh there might be a change there might
be a change because the Palestinians are
not able so far to get rid of the
Israeli occupation and to get rid of the
Israeli apar High especially in the
occupied Palestinian territories in the
West Bank and Gaza through diplomatic or
political or even uh local resistance on
the ground this addition now of an
advisory opinion by the international
Court might mean actually that many
countries in the world will have on a
legal basis to deal with the Israeli
occupation and maybe even the Israeli
State and the Israeli government on a
different
way one example for that was the
decision that was issued by a court in
the Netherlands just 10 days ago
preventing military companies from the
ne
Netherlands to to export parts of the
F35 airplanes to Israel such decisions
actually might make a big difference and
if the advisory opinion at the end of
the day says that
one that the settlements are illegal
which is obvious under international law
and many other policies that Israel is
actually conducting in the occupied
territories are in contrary with
international law and it goes beyond
that because that's what the general
assembly has asked the court to decide
on yes the responsibilities the
responsibilities and the duties of other
state parties of all the countries in
the world so if the advisory opinion
says that those countries should refrain
from certain polies policies in dealing
with the Israeli government or in
dealing with Israel that that might
actually bring about a huge change and
might influence even the isra public
opinion yeah potentially a huge change
but uh it seems like any sort of
solution to this is is a long way off
because despite international calls for
a two-state solution Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin NYU keeps on sticking
to his position he has posted on X
saying Israel rejects international
calls for a permanent settlement with
the Palestinians and Israel will
continue to oppose the unilateral
recognition of a Palestinian
State okay uh T just in regards to this
I mean will these statements that we've
heard time and time again from Netanyahu
rejecting any sort of uh two-state
solution from Netanyahu as well as
everyone else seemingly in his cabinet
is that going to affect do you think how
the icj deals with and sees this
hearing um of course it has to I mean
this is U the Israeli leader uh going
against everyone even International
Community even his closest allies even
in the West in the US I mean uh it's
good that we have been hearing many
Western leaders including Joseph borell
even president presid Biden they're all
now talking the talk when it comes to
the need for a two-state solution and
end of this conflict and and Nat is
rejecting all these uh uh these calls
and and and I think it's a Moment of
Truth for Israel's key allies in the
west especially the US to to take a
position enough with the talk now what
are the tools how you going to pressure
Nan and the Israeli government to go for
peace I mean even many Israelis and many
uh uh uh including the Jewish Li in the
US they're all now saying that netan is
a risk for Israel itself its own
existence because if if occupation
doesn't end then the next scenario is a
one state or a one state solution I mean
many analysts are starting to talk about
this yes if Palestinians have no
Prospect whatsoever to have their own
State then it's one state solution a by
national state I mean name it there are
so many discussions so so the Israelis
will have to face this reality as well
it's not leading them anywhere so what
are they going to do with the five to 7
million Palestinians inside the occupied
land they're there they're not going to
go anywhere well I guess many uh are
hoping that the icj's hearings will
actually Force Israel to take a look at
what it is doing as we mentioned before
there's an unprecedented number of
countries that are involved over the
next week at the icj I think 52 as well
as three other groups I mean that's a
very very strong significant uh number
isn't it is there strengthen numbers and
will that help put extra pressure on
Israel yes I mean I mean your guest from
Tel Aviv he referred to the
International Community the
international Comm is a very fuzzy vague
T term politically I mean when we we ask
what's International Community what is
it is it like the West is it Russia is
it China is it the globe you know but
but now for the first time we see I
would emphasize on on the willingness
and the pressure coming from the global
South countries and that's very
important most of these countries the 52
countries would submitted uh their cases
to the icj on on palestin on the legal
consequences of the occupation
uh they come from the global South and
we see this thift now this this momentum
where I mean many countries have more or
less less Hope on on the UN with with
official forign mechanisms to apply
international law and they're acting now
from their conscious from their moral
positions they have taken and I think
this is important so the question to the
other countries in the world do we want
a unified the globe under one un under
one uh uh under one under international
law or we want to be more fragment
mented the war in Ukraine has caused
fragmentation Gaza now is causing more
fragmentation and I think the
International Globe has to stand to this
and say well enough is enough we need to
be united we need to apply international
law uh without any complicity without
any double standards Muhammad I want to
go uh back to you now the Palestinians
are presenting at the icj today I
believe they've got about three or four
hours to do so what are you expecting
what are you hoping uh to hear from them
as they uh outline uh the issues they
face on a daily
basis I mean it's the first thing that
they they have to tackle is that you
know occupation under international law
is a temporary measure occupation
happens when there is a war but this has
to end and the Israeli occupation is not
ending it's the longest occupation in
modern time and it doesn't seem that
there is a date for for it to end the
second thing would be that it's a
different kind of occupation because
it's a city Colonial occupation it's an
occupation that its main aim is actually
to try and ethnically cleanse the
indigenous population and andn certain
parts of the occupied territory and
bring citizens of of the occupying power
of the state of Israel to live in the
occupied territories which is as we know
is contrary to international law and is
even a war crime under the Rome
convention uh the third thing would be
of course the status of Jerusalem and
the separation of East Jerusalem from
the rest of the West Bank this is a very
important issue and it's becoming more
and more
important those days when we are coming
you know when when Ramadan is is coming
soon and the inability of Palestinians
to worship and exercise their freedom of
religion in praying at the Alamos during
this holy month and we just heard about
the new policies that that uh the
Israeli National Security Minister Bing
wants to enforce so all these
actions this is on the micro level on
the micro level there are so many
instances that your reporters have just
explained in the reports that we we
heard previously but it's it's that you
know the daily life of a
Palestinian from the from the minute
that he wakes up until he goes to sleep
is filled with injustices with
suppression with oppression with human
rights violations whether it's the
freedom of movement whether it's the
ability to work whether it's the ability
to build a house for themselves whether
it's their ability to leave the country
or come back to the country or their
ability to protest or their freedom of
speech or to say anything on social
media or in the newspapers they are at
risk at all times and as human rights
organizations internationally and
locally including Israeli human rights
organiz ations have characterized the
situation here in the occupied
territories as apar I think the time has
come that this apar regime gets actually
an international legal sta by the
highest court in the world the icj
saying that it is so and it should be
dismantled well we'll be keeping a very
close eye on how that all unfolds at the
icj and about an hour and a half or so
thank you so much uh T Muhammad and AKA
we really do appreciate your time here
on El jazer